# S2 Anthropogenic subterranean voids biome

Underground mine tunnel.

The Anthropogenic subterranean voids biome includes a
single functional group of ecosystems that owe their genesis
to excavation by humans. They include underground mines, transport tunnels, tombs, defence and energy installations,
and other infrastructure. Most are very recent ecosystems constructed with earth-moving machinery during the industrial era, but some were constructed manually up to several millennia ago. Productivity is low and energy generally comes from allochthonous sources via connections to the surface, either by atmospheric diffusion or seepage, but some energy is contributed by chemoautotrophic microbes. While sunlight is absent or highly diffuse, some active voids are artificially lit and this may provide sufficient energy to sustain algal autotrophs. Trophic webs are simple and dominated by opportunistic microbes and invertebrates introduced by machinery or directly by humans, or else colonising spontaneously through openings to the surface. The latter may include small mammals that use the voids as refuges or breeding sites. Microbes from external and endolithic sources rapidly colonise newly exposed lithic surfaces and create biofilms that support detritivores
and enhance substrate weathering. The stability of artificial subterranean voids varies depending on their substrate and management, with some prone to collapse and structural change after active use ceases.

# S2.1 Anthropogenic subterranean voids

BIOME: ANTHROPOGENIC SUBTERRANEAN VOIDS 
REALM: SUBTERRANEAN

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

These low-productivity systems in subterranean air-filled voids are created by excavation. Although similar to Aerobic caves (S1.1), these systems are structurally simpler, younger, more geologically varied, and much less biologically diverse with few evolutionary lineages and no local endemism. Low diversity, low endemism, and opportunistic biotic traits stem from founder effects related to their recent anthropogenic origin (hence few colonisation events and little time for evolutionary divergence), as well as low microhabitat niche diversity due to the simple structure of void walls compared to natural caves. The trophic network is truncated and dominated by heterotrophs, usually with no representation of photosynthetic primary producers or herbivores. Generalist detritivores and their pathogens and predators dominate, although some specialists may be associated with bat dung deposits. Biota include invertebrates (notably beetles, springtails and arachnids), fungi, bacteria and transient vertebrates, notably bats, which use the voids as roosts and breeding sites. Bacteria and fungi form biofilms on void surfaces. Many are colonists of human inoculations, with some microbes identified as ‘human- indicator bacteria’ (e.g. Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and high-temperature Bacillus spp.). Fungi are most abundant in humid microsites. Some are parasites and many are critical food sources for invertebrates and protozoans. Sources of energy and nutrients are allochthonous, imported by humans, bats, winged invertebrates, other animals, and seepage moisture. Many taxa have long life spans, slow metabolism and growth and low fecundity, but lack distinctive traits found in the biota of natural caves. Some are temporary below-ground inhabitants, have populations that live entirely above- or below-ground, or have life cycles necessitating the use of both environments.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

Excavations associated with tunnels, vaults and mines. While some are abandoned, others are continuously accessed by humans, enhancing connectivity with the surface, resource importation and biotic dispersal. Substrates include a range of rock types as well as artificial surfaces on linings and debris piles. Air movement varies
from still to turbulent (i.e. active train tunnels). Light is absent except at openings and where artificial sources are maintained by humans, sometimes supporting algae (i.e. lampenflora). Humidity and temperature are relatively constant, and nutrients are scarce except where enriched by human sources.

## DISTRIBUTION

Scattered worldwide, but mostly associated with urban centres, transit corridors and industrial mines.
