# M4 Anthropogenic marine biome

Humans have constructed, deposited or dumped artificial structures in the oceans that either confine managed marine organisms or attract marine biota that would not otherwise occupy such locations. These structures are distributed globally but are most common in regions of high-density occupation or transit. They include shipwrecks and mineral, gas, or energy infrastructure, pipelines, and rubble piles, as well as aquaculture infrastructure. These installations provide an epibenthic substrate for sessile benthic organisms, as well as a demersal or pelagic environment for mobile organisms. Diversity and biomass of the epibenthic biofouling community is positively related to substrate rugosity. Most energy is supplied to these ecosystems from allochthonous sources, either passively via currents or actively through addition by humans (as is the
case in aquaculture). Epibenthic and planktonic marine algae,
however, make a contribution to the energy budget through local primary production. Microbial decomposers and invertebrate detritivores in the sediments beneath and around the structures feed on particulate organic matter from the epibenthic biota
(e.g. waste products and decaying bodies) or on unconsumed food delivered to managed species. The elevated productivity or visual features of artificial structures often attract larger pelagic predators, which forage in the vicinity.

# M4.1 Submerged artificial structures

BIOME: M4 ANTHROPOGENIC MARINE SYSTEMS
REALM: MARINE

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

These deployments include submerged structures with high vertical relief including ship wrecks, oil and gas infrastructure, and designed artificial reefs, as well as some low-relief structures (i.e. rubble piles). The latter do not differ greatly from adjacent natural reefs, but structures with high vertical relief are distinguished by an abundance
of zooplanktivorous fish, as well as reef-associated fishes. Macroalgae are sparse or absent as the ecosystem is fed by currents and ocean swell delivering phytoplankton to sessile invertebrates. Complex surfaces quickly thicken with a biofouling community characterised by an abundance of filter-feeding invertebrates (e.g. sponges, barnacles, bivalves and ascidians) and their predators (e.g. crabs and flatworms). Invertebrate diversity is high, with representatives from every living Phylum. Structures without complex surfaces, such as the smooth, wide expanse of a hull, may suffer the sporadic loss of all biofouling communities after storm events. This feeds the sandy bottom community, evident as a halo of benthic invertebrates (e.g. polychaetes and amphipods), which also benefit from the plume of waste and detritus drifting from the reef community. Artificial structures also provide a visual focus attracting pelagic fish
and marine mammals, which respond similarly to fish-attraction devices and drift objects.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

The high vertical relief of many artificial structures enables biota to access plankton continuously transported by currents. They may be situated
on otherwise flat, soft-bottom habitats and isolated to varying degrees from other hard substrates. High-energy waters experience low variation in temperature and salinity (except those near major river systems). Currents and associated eddies cause strong horizontal flow, while ocean swell creates orbital current velocities at least 10-fold greater than horizontal currents. Near large urban centres, fishing reduces populations of large predatory fish, resulting in a continuum across species and deployments from purely fish attraction to fish production (such as via the reef facilitating the planktivorous food chain).
The historical, opportunistic use of materials (e.g. rubber tyres, construction materials, or inadequately decommissioned vessels) has left legacies of pollutants. Compared to artificial reefs, oil and gas infrastructure is more exposed to light/noise/ chemical pollution associated with operations as well the spread of invasive species.

## DISTRIBUTION

Millions of artificial reefs and fish-attraction devices are deployed in coastal waters worldwide, including >10,000 oil and gas structures, mostly in tropical and temperate waters. More than 500 oil and gas platforms
were decommissioned and left as artificial reefs in US waters since 1940. Many others are candidates for reefing after decommissioning in coming decades (>600 in the Asia-Pacific alone). Worldwide since 1984, over 130 ships and planes have purposely been sunk for recreational SCUBA-diving.

# M4.2 Marine aquafarms

BIOME: M4 ANTHROPOGENIC MARINE SYSTEMS
REALM: MARINE

Salmon Farm, North-West Bay, Tasmania, Australia. Source: Daniel Patman on Flickr, licensed under CC BY 3.0.

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

Marine aquafarms (i.e. mariculture) are localised, high-productivity systems within and around enclosures constructed for the breeding, rearing and harvesting of marine plants and animals, including finfish, molluscs, crustaceans, algae and other marine plants. Allochthonous energy and nutrient inputs are delivered by humans and by diffusion from surrounding marine waters. Autochthonous inputs are small and produced by pelagic algae or biofilms
on the infrastructure, unless the farmed species are aquatic macrophytes. More commonly, farmed species are consumers that belong to middle or upper trophic levels. Diversity is low across taxa, and the trophic web is dominated by a super- abundance of target species. Where multiple target species
are cultivated, they are selected to ensure neutral or mutualistic interactions with one another (i.e. detritivores that consume the waste of a higher-level consumer). Farmed biota are harvested periodically to produce food, nutrient agar, horticultural products, jewellery and cosmetics. Their high population densities are maintained by continual inputs of food and regular re-stocking
to compensate harvest. Farmed species may be ‘genetically improved’ for such traits as faster growth, greater yield, resistance to disease, etc., and are often bred selectively in hatcheries and then released into the enclosures. Inputs of food and nutrient may increase abundance of non-target species, including opportunistic microalgae, zooplankton, and pathogens and predators of the target species. These pest species or
their impacts may be controlled by antibiotics or herbicides or by scaring or culling (e.g. pinnipeds around fish farms). The enclosures impose barriers to movement of larger organisms, but some cultivated stock may escape, while wild individuals from the surrounding waters may invade the enclosure. Escapees may interact with wild biota through completion, predation and genetic introgression. Enclosures are generally permeable to small organisms, propagules and waste products of larger organisms, nutrients and pathogens, enabling the farm ecosystem to extend beyond the confines of the infrastructure.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

Most marine farms are located in sheltered coastal waters but some are located in the
open ocean or on land in tanks or ponds filled with seawater. Those in marine waters experience currents, tides, and flow- through of marine energy, matter and biota characteristic of the surrounding environment. Those on land are more insular, with intensively controlled light and temperature, recirculation systems that filter and recycle water and waste, and intensive anthropogenic inputs of food and nutrients, antibiotics and herbicides. Marine enclosures have netting and frames that provide substrates for biofilms and a limited array of benthic organisms (controlled with anti-fouling chemicals), but usually exclude the benthos. Land-based systems have smooth walls and floors that provide limited habitat heterogeneity for benthic biota.

## DISTRIBUTION

Rapidly expanding around coastal Asia, Europe, North America and Mesoamerica, and southern temperate regions. Open-ocean facilities near Hawaii and Puerto Rico.
