# S1 Subterranean lithic biome

Marakoopa caves, Mole Creek, Tasmania, Australia.

The subterranean lithic biome includes non-aquatic lithic systems beneath the earth’s surface. Sunlight is absent or
of insufficient intensity to sustain photosynthesis. There is no standing water and moisture is supplied primarily by seepage through the substrate and may be lost by slow diffusion through the atmosphere to cave openings or by vertical or lateral seepage through the substrate. These physically stable systems exhibit low levels of environmental variability. Rarely, mass movements, for example rock falls, may re-organise the physical structure of subterranean ecosystems. Subterranean ecosystems have truncated trophic structures with no
photoautotrophs and few obligate predators. Heterotrophic microbes and invertebrates dominate the biota, while chemoautotrophs are the primary energy assimilators. Most have low metabolic rates and prolonged life histories in response to resource limitations, resulting in low overall productivity. The subterranean biome includes dry caves and endolithic systems distributed throughout the earth’s crust. Incursions of fresh or marine waters generate transitional biomes (SF, SM).

# S1.1 Aerobic caves

BIOME: SUBTERRANEAN LITHIC ECOSYSTEMS
REALM: SUBTERRANEAN

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

Dark subterranean air-filled
voids support simple, low productivity systems. The trophic network is truncated and dominated by heterotrophs, with
no representation of photosynthetic primary producers or herbivores. Diversity is low, comprising detritivores and their pathogens and predators, although there may be a few specialist predators confined to resource-rich hotspots, such
as bat latrines or seeps. Biota include invertebrates (notably beetles, springtails and arachnids), fungi, bacteria and transient vertebrates, notably bats, which use surface-connected caves as roosts and breeding sites. Bacteria and fungi form biofilms
on rock surfaces. Fungi are more abundant in humid microsites. Some are parasites and many are critical food sources for invertebrates and protozoans. Allochthonous energy and nutrients are imported via seepage moisture, tree roots, bats and other winged animals. This leads to fine-scale spatial heterogeneity in resource distribution, reflected in patterns of biotic diversity and abundance. Autochthonous energy can be produced by chemoautotrophs. For example, chemoautotrophic Proteobacteria are prominent in subterranean caves formed by sulphide springs. They fix carbon through sulphide oxidation, producing sulphuric acid and gypsum residue in snottite draperies (i.e. microbial mats), accelerating chemical corrosion. The majority of biota are obligate subterranean organisms that complete their life cycles below ground. These are generalist detritivores and some are also opportunistic predators,
reflecting the selection pressure of food scarcity. Distinctive traits include specialised non-visual sensory organs, reduced eyes, pigmentation and wings, elongated appendages, long lifespans, slow metabolism and growth and low fecundity. Other cave taxa are temporary below-ground inhabitants, have populations living entirely above- or below-ground, or life cycles necessitating
use of both environments. The relative abundance and diversity of temporary inhabitants decline rapidly with distance from
the cave entrance. The specialist subterranean taxa belong
to relatively few evolutionary lineages that either persisted as relics in caves after the extinction of above-ground relatives
or diversified after colonisation by above-ground ancestors. Although diversity is low, local endemism is high, reflecting insularity and limited connectivity between cave systems.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

Most caves form from
the chemical weathering of limestone, dolomite or gypsum, either from surface waters or from phreatic waters. Caves also derive from lava tubes and other substrates. Characteristics include the absence of light except at openings, low variability in temperature and humidity, and scarcity of nutrients. The
high physical fragmentation of cave substrates limits biotic connectivity and promotes insular evolution in stable conditions.

## DISTRIBUTION

Scattered worldwide, but mostly in the Northern Hemisphere, in limestone (map), basalt flows, and rarely in other lithic substrates.

# S1.2 Endolithic systems

BIOME: SUBTERRANEAN LITHIC ECOSYSTEMS
REALM: SUBTERRANEAN

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

Lithic matrices and their microscopic cracks and cavities host microbial communities. Their very low productivity is constrained by the scarcity of light, nutrients, and water, and sometimes also by high temperatures. Diversity is low and the trophic network is truncated, supporting microscopic bacteria, archaea, viruses and unicellular eukaryotes. Most are detritivores or lithoautotrophs, which derive energy, oxidants, carbohydrates and simple organic acids from carbon dioxide, geological sources of hydrogen and mineral compounds of potassium, iron and sulphur. Some fissures are large enough
to support small eukaryotic predators such as nematodes. Photoautotrophs (i.e. cyanobacteria) are present only in the surface layers of exposed rocks. Sampling suggests that these systems harbour 95% of the world’s prokaryote life (bacteria and archaea), with rocks below the deep oceans and continents containing similar densities of cells and potentially accounting for a significant proportion of sequestered carbon. Endolithic microbes are characterised by extremely slow reproductive rates, especially in deep sedimentary rocks, which are the
most oligotrophic substrates. At some depth within both terrestrial and marine substrates, microbes are sustained by energy from organic matter that percolates through fissures from surface systems. In deeper or less permeable parts of the crust, however, lithoautotrophic microbes are the primary energy synthesisers that sustain heterotrophs in the food
web. Methanogenic archaea and iron-reducing bacteria appear to be important autotrophs in sub-oceanic basalts. All endolithic microbes are characterised by slow metabolism and reproduction rates. At some locations they tolerate extreme pressures, temperatures (up to 125°C) and acidity (pH&lt;2), notably in crustal fluids. Little is currently known of endemism, but it may be expected to be high based on the insularity of these ecosystems.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

Endolithic systems are characterised by a lack of light, a scarcity of nutrients, and high pressures at depth. Temperatures vary within the crust from &lt;20°C up to 125°C, but show little temporal variation. The chemical properties and physical structure of lithic matrices influence the supply of resources and the movement of biota. Stable cratonic massifs have minimal pore space for microbial occupation, which is limited to occasional cracks and fissures. Sedimentary substrates offer more space, but nutrients may be scarce, while fluids in basic volcanic and crustal rocks have more abundant nutrients. Chemical and biogenic weathering occurs through biogenic acids and other corrosive agents. The matrix is mostly stable, but disturbances include infrequent and spatially variable earthquakes and volcanic intrusions.

## DISTRIBUTION

Throughout the earth’s crust, from surface rocks to a predicted depth of up to 4–4.5 km below the land surface and 7–7.5 km below ocean floors. Not mapped.

# S2 Anthropogenic subterranean voids biome

Underground mine tunnel.

The Anthropogenic subterranean voids biome includes a
single functional group of ecosystems that owe their genesis
to excavation by humans. They include underground mines, transport tunnels, tombs, defence and energy installations,
and other infrastructure. Most are very recent ecosystems constructed with earth-moving machinery during the industrial era, but some were constructed manually up to several millennia ago. Productivity is low and energy generally comes from allochthonous sources via connections to the surface, either by atmospheric diffusion or seepage, but some energy is contributed by chemoautotrophic microbes. While sunlight is absent or highly diffuse, some active voids are artificially lit and this may provide sufficient energy to sustain algal autotrophs. Trophic webs are simple and dominated by opportunistic microbes and invertebrates introduced by machinery or directly by humans, or else colonising spontaneously through openings to the surface. The latter may include small mammals that use the voids as refuges or breeding sites. Microbes from external and endolithic sources rapidly colonise newly exposed lithic surfaces and create biofilms that support detritivores
and enhance substrate weathering. The stability of artificial subterranean voids varies depending on their substrate and management, with some prone to collapse and structural change after active use ceases.

# S2.1 Anthropogenic subterranean voids

BIOME: ANTHROPOGENIC SUBTERRANEAN VOIDS
REALM: SUBTERRANEAN

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

These low-productivity systems in subterranean air-filled voids are created by excavation. Although similar to Aerobic caves (S1.1), these systems are structurally simpler, younger, more geologically varied, and much less biologically diverse with few evolutionary lineages and no local endemism. Low diversity, low endemism, and opportunistic biotic traits stem from founder effects related to their recent anthropogenic origin (hence few colonisation events and little time for evolutionary divergence), as well as low microhabitat niche diversity due to the simple structure of void walls compared to natural caves. The trophic network is truncated and dominated by heterotrophs, usually with no representation of photosynthetic primary producers or herbivores. Generalist detritivores and their pathogens and predators dominate, although some specialists may be associated with bat dung deposits. Biota include invertebrates (notably beetles, springtails and arachnids), fungi, bacteria and transient vertebrates, notably bats, which use the voids as roosts and breeding sites. Bacteria and fungi form biofilms on void surfaces. Many are colonists of human inoculations, with some microbes identified as ‘human- indicator bacteria’ (e.g. Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus and high-temperature Bacillus spp.). Fungi are most abundant in humid microsites. Some are parasites and many are critical food sources for invertebrates and protozoans. Sources of energy and nutrients are allochthonous, imported by humans, bats, winged invertebrates, other animals, and seepage moisture. Many taxa have long life spans, slow metabolism and growth and low fecundity, but lack distinctive traits found in the biota of natural caves. Some are temporary below-ground inhabitants, have populations that live entirely above- or below-ground, or have life cycles necessitating the use of both environments.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

Excavations associated with tunnels, vaults and mines. While some are abandoned, others are continuously accessed by humans, enhancing connectivity with the surface, resource importation and biotic dispersal. Substrates include a range of rock types as well as artificial surfaces on linings and debris piles. Air movement varies
from still to turbulent (i.e. active train tunnels). Light is absent except at openings and where artificial sources are maintained by humans, sometimes supporting algae (i.e. lampenflora). Humidity and temperature are relatively constant, and nutrients are scarce except where enriched by human sources.

## DISTRIBUTION

Scattered worldwide, but mostly associated with urban centres, transit corridors and industrial mines.

# SF1 Subterranean freshwaters biome

The Subterranean freshwaters biome includes streams,
small lakes and aquifers beneath the earth’s surface and potentially has the largest volume of water of all the freshwater biomes. In the absence of sunlight, these ecosystems rely on allochthonous energy sourced from surface ecosystems via connected waters and in situ chemoautotrophs. Depending on the mode of connectivity to the surface, water flow- through varies from extremely rapid to slow. Highly connected subterranean streams in monsoonal climates undergo seasonal flooding and drying cycles. In contrast, paleo- aquifers are characterised by slow, low-variability seepage over millennial time scales. Inflowing water is the principal source of dissolved oxygen and mineral nutrients, although some nutrients are liberated by in situ weathering of lithic substrates. The water regime largely determines environmental variability in subterranean freshwaters, but these systems may occasionally be influenced by mass movements. The trophic structure of subterranean waters is typically truncated, although photosynthetically inactive, algae and higher-plant propagules may be transient occupants in systems that are connected to the surface. Chemoautotrophic and heterotrophic microbes
in biofilms and the water column dominate the trophic web, supporting small invertebrate detritivores and predators. Small predatory fish may occur in streams and lakes, where voids
in the subsurface are of sufficient size. Productivity, metabolic rates, life histories and the diversity of the biota all reflect resource scarcity but may vary depending on water source. Insular systems exhibit high levels of endemism.

# SF1.1 Underground streams and pools

BIOME: SF1 SUBTERRANEAN FRESHWATER SYSTEMS
REALM: TRANSITIONAL SUBTERRANEAN-FRESHWATER

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

Subterranean streams, pools and aquatic voids (flooded caves) are low-productivity systems devoid of light. The taxonomic and functional diversity of
these water bodies is low, but they may host local endemics, depending on connectivity with surface waters and between cave systems. The truncated trophic network is entirely heterotrophic, with no photosynthetic primary producers or herbivores. Detritivores and their predators are dominant, although a few specialist predators may be associated with resource-rich hotspots. Microbial mats composed of bacteria and aquatic fungi covering submerged rock surfaces are
major food sources for protozoans and invertebrates. Other biota include planktonic bacteria, crustaceans, annelids, molluscs, arachnids and fish in larger voids. Chemoautotrophic proteobacteria are locally abundant in sulphur-rich waters fed by springs but not widespread. Obligate denizens of subterranean waters complete their life cycles entirely below ground and derive from relatively few evolutionary lineages. These make
up a variable portion of the biota, depending on connectivity
to surface waters. Most species are generalist detritivores coexisting under weak competitive interactions. Some are
also opportunistic predators, reflecting selection pressures
of food scarcity. Distinctive traits include the absence of eyes and pigmentation, long lifespans, slow metabolism and growth rates and low fecundity. Less-specialised biota include taxa that spend part of their life cycles below ground and part above,
as well as temporary below-ground inhabitants. Transient vertebrates occur only in waters of larger subterranean voids that are well connected to surface streams with abundant food.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

Most caves form from chemical weathering of soluble rocks, such as limestone or dolomite, and others include lava tunnels. Cave waters are devoid of light, typically low in dissolved oxygen nutrients,
and food, and exhibit low variability in temperature. Water chemistry reflects substrate properties (i.e. high Calcium levels in limestone voids). Resource supply and biotic dispersal depend on connectivity with surface waters and flow velocity and turbulence. In the absence of light, surface-connected streams are major allochthonous sources of energy and nutrients. Disconnected systems are the most biologically insular and oligotrophic, and may also be limited by nutrient imbalance. These features promote insular evolution in stable conditions.

## DISTRIBUTION

Scattered worldwide, mostly in the Northern Hemisphere in limestone (map) and more rarely in basalt flows and other lithic substrates.

# SF1.2 Groundwater ecosystems

BIOME: SF1 SUBTERRANEAN FRESHWATER SYSTEMS
REALM: TRANSITIONAL SUBTERRANEAN-FRESHWATER

## ECOLOGICAL TRAITS

These low-productivity ecosystems are found within or below groundwater (phreatic) zones.
They include aquifers (underground layers of water-saturated permeable rock or unconsolidated gravel, sand, or silt) and hyporheic zones beneath rivers and lakes (i.e. where shallow groundwater and surface water mix). Diversity and abundance of biota decline with depth and connectivity to surface waters, as do nutrients (i.e. most meiofauna is limited to 100 m
deep). Microbial communities are functionally diverse and invertebrate taxa exhibit high local endemism where aquifers are poorly connected. Trophic networks are truncated and comprised almost exclusively of heterotrophic microbes and invertebrates. Chemoautotrophic bacteria are the only source of autochthonous energy. Herbivores only occur where plant material enters groundwater systems (i.e. in well-connected hyporheic zones). Microbes and their protozoan predators dwell on particle surfaces rather than in pore water. They
play key roles in weathering and mineral formation, engineer chemically distinctive microhabitats through redox reactions, and are repositories of Carbon, Nitrogen and Phosphorus
within the ecosystem. Meio-faunal detritivores and predators transfer Carbon and nutrients from biofilms to larger invertebrate predators such as crustaceans, annelids, nematodes, water mites and beetles. These larger trophic generalists live in interstitial waters, either browsing on particle biofilms or ingesting sediment grains, digesting their surface microbes,
and excreting ‘cleaned’ grains. They have morphological and behavioural traits that equip them for life in dark, resource- scarce groundwater where space is limited. These include slow metabolism and growth, long lifespans without resting stages, low fecundity, lack of pigmentation, reduced eyes, enhanced non-optic sensory organs and elongated body shapes with enhanced segmentation. Much of the biota belongs to ancient subterranean lineages that have diverged sympatrically within aquifers or allopatrically from repeated colonisations or aquifer fragmentation.

## KEY ECOLOGICAL DRIVERS

Groundwater ecosystems are characterised by a scarcity of nutrients, Carbon, dissolved oxygen and free space, and an absence of light. They occur within basin fill or other porous geological strata. Groundwater flow, pore size, interstitial biogeochemistry and hydrological conductivity to adjacent aquifers and surface waters determine ecosystem properties. Subsurface water residence times
vary from days in shallow, well-connected, coarse-grained hyporheic systems to thousands of years in deep, poorly connected aquifers confined between impermeable rock strata. Lack of connectivity promotes insularity and endemism as
well as reductive biogeochemical processes that influence the availability of food and nutrients.

## DISTRIBUTION

Globally distributed. Map shows only the major groundwater basins by recharge rates.
